Control protocol transport layer. (#38)
pymeasure/leco-protocol: control_protocol.md

The following diagram shows this example communication with two Components:
:::{mermaid}
graph TD
    CA([CA]) -->|"Request A"| D[recv] -->|"IA|Request A"| A([Coordinator])
    CB([CB]) -->|"Request B"| C[recv] -->|"IB|Request B"| A
    subgraph ROUTER socket
        B
        C
        D
        E
    end
    A -. "IA|Reply A" .-> B
    B[send] -. "Reply A" .-> CA
    A -. "IB|Reply B" .-> E
    E[send] -. "Reply B" .-> CB
:::

### Naming scheme

Each Component has an individual ID, given by the user, the Component ID.
A Component ID must be a series of bytes, without the ASCII character "." (byte value 46).
Component IDs must be unique in a Node, i.e. among the Componets connected to a single Coordinator.

As each Component belongs to exactly one Coordinator, it is fully identified by the combination of Node ID and Component ID.
This _full ID_ is the composition of Node ID, ".", and Component ID.

The receiver of a message may be specified without the Node ID, if the receiver lives in the same Node.

:::{note}
How to address the Coordinator? I used "no Recipient".
Or a fixed name?

> :::

Reviewer: I am not sure I understand, this is now about what to do when I want to talk to the Coordinator itself? maybe repeat the Node ID? CA wants to talk directly to Co1 (for whatever reason): `| Co1.Co1 | Co1.CA | other frames  ` - when Co1 tries to look up Co1 it finds itself in its own address book

Author: I added `COORDINATOR` as a placeholder address, such that it is easy to replace all occurances at once.

##### Initial connection

After connecting to a Coordinator (`Co1`), a Component (`CA`) shall send a CONNECT message indicating its ID.
The Coordinator shall respond with an ACKNOWLEDGE, giving the Node ID and other relevant information, or with an ERROR, if the ID is already taken.
After that successful handshake, the Coordinator shall store the connection identity and correspondind Component ID in its address book.
:::{note}
publish that information
:::
Similarly, the Component shall store the Node ID and use it from this moment to generate its full ID.

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    Note over CA,Co1: ID "CA" is still free
    CA ->> Co1: ||CA|CONNECT
    Note right of Co1: Connection identity "IA"
    Note right of Co1: Stores "CA" with identity "IA"
    Co1 ->> CA: Co1.CA||ACKNOWLEDGE: Node ID is "Co1"
    Note left of CA: Stores "Co1" as Node ID
    Note over CA,Co1: ID "CA" is already used
    CA ->> Co1: ||CA|CONNECT
    Co1 ->> CA: CA||ERROR: ID "CA" is already used.
    Note left of CA: May retry with another ID
:::

##### Heartbeat

We use heartbeat to know, whether a communication partner is still online.

Every message received counts as a heartbeat.

:::{note}

> TBD: Respond to every non empty message with an empty one?

Reviewer: Sounds good to me, pending discussion in #40

Reviewer 2: I lament the loss of symmetry in messages, but if there's no other way to track message receipt in zmq, I guess it cannot be avoided. Deeper discussion in #40.

    Note over CA,Co1: The first message could be as well:
    CA ->> Co1: CB|Co1.CA| Give me property A.
:::

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    CA ->> Co1: Co2.CB|Co1.CA| Give me property A.
    Note over Co1,Co2: Co1.DEALER socket sends to Co2.ROUTER
    Co1 ->> Co2: Co2.CB|Co1.CA| Give me property A.
    Co2 ->> CB: Co2.CB|Co1.CA| Give me property A.
    Note left of CB: Reads property A
    CB ->> Co2: Co1.CA|Co2.CB| Property A has value 5.
    Note over Co1,Co2: Co2.DEALER socket sends to Co1.ROUTER
    Co2 ->> Co1: Co1.CA|Co2.CB| Property A has value 5.
    Co1 ->> CA: Co1.CA|Co2.CB| Property A has value 5.
:::

The following flow chart shows the decision scheme and message modification in a Coordinator.
`IA` and `IB` are the connection identities of `CA` and `Co1.Recipient`.
Bold arrows indicate message flow, thin lines indicate decision flow.

:::{mermaid}
flowchart TB
    C([CA DEALER]) == "NodeID.Recipient|Co1.CA|Content" ==> R0
    R0[Co1 ROUTER receive] == "IA|NodeID.Recipient|Co1.CA|Content" ==> Code[remove sender identity]
    Code == "NodeID.Recipient|Co1.CA|Content" ==> NS
    NS -- "is None" --> Local
    NS{NodeID} -- "== Co1"--> Local

>     Local{Recipient<br> is None} -- "yes" --> Self([Message for Co1<br> itself])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Local{Recipient<br> is Co1} -- "yes" --> Self([Message for Co1<br> itself])
```

Author: I added the COORDINATOR placeholder.

# Control protocol

The control protocol transmits messages via its {ref}`transport-layer` from one Component to another one.
The {ref]}`message-layer` is the common language to understand commands, thus creating a remote procedure call.

> (transport-layer)=

Reviewer 2: These labels seem superfluous? Myst Parser should already autocreate the appropriate anchors (see e.g. the usage in the glossary), here even with the same anchor text.

Author: Does it replace spaces with colons?

Reviewer 2: toLowercase, spaces to dashes, remove punctuation and other stuff like parens, slashes. Most complex example is https://github.com/pymeasure/leco-protocol/blame/8a2482956554d1bac07f30521e37d60c2df41da1/glossary.md#L40

Reviewer 2: Docs for how these "slugs" are arrived at here: https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/latest/syntax/optional.html#anchor-slug-structure

Reviewer 2: Do you want to remove that label? Or what was your conclusion?

Coordinators shall have one DEALER socket per other Coordinator in the Network.
This DEALER socket shall connect to the other Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Messages must be sent to a Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

(router-sockets)=
#### Particularities of ROUTER sockets

A small introduction to ROUTER sockets, for more details see [zmq guide chapter 3](https://zguide.zeromq.org/docs/chapter3/#Exploring-ROUTER-Sockets).

A router socket assigns a random _identity_ to each connecting peer.
If, for example, two Components `CA`, `CB` connect to the ROUTER sockets, the socket assigns the identities, which we call `IA`, `IB` (they can be any bytes sequence).

Whenever a message is sent to the ROUTER socket from a peer, it reads as a first frame that identity.
For example if `CA` sends the message `Request A`, the ROUTER socket will read `IA|Request A`.
That way, you can return an answer to exactly the original peer and not, for example `CB`.
If you call the ROUTER's send command with `IA|Reply A`, the socket will send `Reply A` to the peer, whose connection is `IA`, in this case `CA`.

The following diagram shows this example communication with two Components:
:::{mermaid}

> graph TD

Reviewer 2: Conceptually, a ROUTER socket has one "send" and one "recv" node (method), so I find the display here a bit confusing. 
Maybe it would be better to split into two separate graphs, first showing the flow for CA, then for CB? But then, they will be ~identical, so we don't learn that much.
Maybe this would be better as a sequence diagram with participants CA, CB, send, recv, Coordinator, and you show the flow how messages exchanged with CA and CB flow through send/recv differently? Do you know what I mean? If not I can sketch it.

Author: I think I know, what you mean:
CA to Co1 recv. Co1 send to CO2 recv etc.?

Author: Looking at the diagram, I understand you.
Is that, what you intend:
~~~mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Code
    participant ROUTER as ROUTER socket
    Note over Code, ROUTER: Coordinator
    CA ->> ROUTER: "Request A"
    ROUTER ->> Code: "IA|Request A"
    Code ->> ROUTER: "IA|Reply A"
    ROUTER ->> CA: "Reply A"
    CB ->> ROUTER: "Request B"
    ROUTER ->> Code: "IB|Request B"
    Code ->> ROUTER: "IB|Reply B"
    ROUTER ->> CB: "Reply B"
~~~

Reviewer 2: Exactly!

Reviewer: I am not sure about calling it "Coordinator internals", since already the ROUTER socket is an (internal) part of the Coordinator, although it does make one connection to the outside. I am not perfectly sure about the elegance of calling it "Code", but I think it is clearly understandable, and that is the main goal of it, I think, so for me it is fine.

Reviewer 2: Followong that reasoning, the Router Socket is also "Code", though, isn't it?

Author: What about "Message handling"?

Reviewer 2: Sounds good to me!

Reviewer: sounds good to me too. 

For reference and explanation, I made the distinction here between the direct _application "Code"_, controlled directly by somebody implementing this protocol, and the _zmq socket_, which although undoubtedly "lives" in some sense in "code", (not the application code implementing the protocol) is not controlled/touched in any way by a user who implements the protocol, treated as a black box outside. Into this black box, the "Code" stuffs whatever it is written to stuff, and gets out whatever the zmq socket will provide.

Reviewer 2: (btw Benjamin, have you seen our Matrix room? Want to joint? Could be a good way to get a video call set up one weekend https://matrix.to/#/#pymeasure-ecp:matrix.org)

Reviewer: thanks for the reminder!

    CA([CA]) -->|"Request A"| D[recv] -->|"IA|Request A"| A([Coordinator])
    CB([CB]) -->|"Request B"| C[recv] -->|"IB|Request B"| A
    subgraph ROUTER socket
        B
        C
        D
        E
    end
    A -. "IA|Reply A" .-> B
    B[send] -. "Reply A" .-> CA
    A -. "IB|Reply B" .-> E
    E[send] -. "Reply B" .-> CB
:::

### Protocol basics

#### Naming scheme

Each Component has an individual ID, given by the user, the _Component ID_.
A Component ID must be a series of bytes, without the ASCII character "." (byte value 46).
Component IDs must be unique in a {ref}`Node <network-structure.md#node>`, i.e. among the Componets connected to a single Coordinator.
The Coordinator itself has the Component ID `COORDINATOR`.
:::{note}
COORDINATOR is a placeholder for the final version.
:::

Also every Node ID has to be unique in the Network.
As each Component belongs to exactly one Coordinator, it is fully identified by the combination of Node ID and Component ID., which is globally unique.
This _full ID_ is the composition of Node ID, ".", and Component ID.

> For example `Co1.CA` is the full ID of the Component `CA` in the Node `Co1`.

Reviewer 2: It's great that you tie what we called "namespace" to Node ID -- it reuses the same term we already established (resulting in less complexity)! 
This also enables an improvement to bring more clarity to the diagrams: Just as we abbreviate components with "CA", "CB", etc., we could start calling Node namespaces "N1", "N2", etc (or "NA", "NB", if you prefer) instead of "Co1"?

Author: Good idea, bringing the node ID further to N1...

I like to distinguish with digits/letters the types as well, so N1.CA

Reviewer 2: Thanks!

The receiver of a message may be specified without the Node ID, if the receiver lives in the same Node.

#### Message composition

A message consists in two or more frames.
1. The receiver full ID.
2. The sender full ID.
3. Message content: The optional payload, which can be 0 or more frames.

(address-book)=

> #### Address book

Reviewer 2: A refinement of terms: 
We should use different terms for different things, so it's easier to get a clear picture. What above is an "ID" is here an "Address" (iiuc); further above the random zmq designator is called "identity" (the abbrevation of which is generally "ID").

Can we/should we get a cleaner separation here, e.g. by calling the user-chosen designator "address" (local and global) and the random zmq thing "ID"? Or some other combination (local "name" and global "address", vs. "ID")?

Reviewer 2: A third related/overloaded term (see e.g. https://github.com/pymeasure/leco-protocol/issues/22#issuecomment-1414403570) is the "address" meaning the host:port combination that zmq sockets live at.

Ideally, to avoid confusing ourselves and others, we find/choose different (compound) words for these different concepts, and stick to them.

Author: I used address for host / port (TCP), except in address book 🤦‍♂️; ID for our own naming scheme; (connection) identity for the Zmq thing, as it is thir term.

Could we use "Component name" and Node name?

Author: Address is given by popular usage, identity is the definition of zmq. So they are both fixed.

Author: I'm not sure, whether "address book" is a good name, even though it just contains names, because it is similar to a normal address book.

Or should we call it Directory?

Reviewer 2: "Directory" sounds good to me!

> I used address for host / port (TCP)
> (connection) identity for the Zmq thing, as it is their term.

Agreed to both.

> ID for our own naming scheme; 

I don't like how we collide because "ID" is just the abbrevation for "identity"/identification, this is bound to confuse.

> Could we use "Component name" and Node name?

We could use the parts "Namespace" and "(Component) name"; the first we have already established. The second may also be "obviously" clear, and we could probably use "Name" alone. 
How do we call the whole thing? "Path" maybe? (not 100% convinced)

Author: "Full name" for the combination?

Path reminds me of file system, but on the other hand, we have a similar syntax: `path = folder.file`

Reviewer 2: 👍 to Full name.

Reviewer: full name is good for me too

    CA ->> Co1: Co1.CB|CA|Content
    Note right of Co1: Does not know CA
    Co1 ->> CA: CA|Co1.COORDINATOR|ERROR:I do not know you
    Note left of CA: Should send a SIGNIN message
:::

##### Heartbeat

We use heartbeat to know, whether a communication partner is still online.

Every message received counts as a heartbeat.

A Component should and a Coordinator shall send a STATUS request and wait some time before considering a connection dead.
A Coordinator shall follow the {ref}`sign out routine<sign-out>` for a signed in Component considered dead.

:::{note}
TBD: Respond to every non empty message with an empty one?
:::

(sign-out)=
##### Signing out

A Component should tell a Coordinator, when it stops working, with a SIGNOUT message.
The Coordinator shall ACKNOWLEDGE the sign out and remove the ID from its address book.
It shall also publish to the other Coordinators in the network that this Component signed out, see {ref}`Coordinator coordination<coordinator-coordination>`.

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    CA ->> Co1: COORDINATOR|Co1.CA|SIGNOUT
    Co1 ->> CA: Co1.CA|Co1.COORDINATOR|ACKNOWLEDGE
    Note right of Co1: Removes "CA" with identity "IA"<br> from address book

>     Note left of CA: Shall not send any message anymore

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Note left of CA: Shall not send any message anymore except SIGNIN
```

:::

#### Communication with other Components

The following two examples show, how a message is transferred between two components `CA`, `CB` via one or two Coordinators.
Coordinators shall send messages from their DEALER socket to other Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Coordinators shall hand on the message to the corresponding Coordinator or connected Component.

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    CA ->> Co1: Co1.CB|Co1.CA| Give me property A.
    Co1 ->> CB: Co1.CB|Co1.CA| Give me property A.
    Note left of CB: Reads property A
    CB ->> Co1: Co1.CA|Co1.CB| Property A has value 5.
    Co1 ->> CA: Co1.CA|Co1.CB| Property A has value 5.
    Note over CA,Co1: The first message could be as well:

>     CA ->> Co1: CB|Co1.CA| Give me property A.

Reviewer 2: Mermaid sequence diagrams can do[ "alt" ](https://mermaid.js.org/syntax/sequenceDiagram.html#alt)to incorporate alternative paths, so this could be included after the first line.

Author: Oh cool. Thanks

Author: Done

    Co1 ->> Co2: Co2.CB|Co1.CA| Give me property A.
    Co2 ->> CB: Co2.CB|Co1.CA| Give me property A.
    Note left of CB: Reads property A
    CB ->> Co2: Co1.CA|Co2.CB| Property A has value 5.
    Note over Co1,Co2: Co2.DEALER socket sends to Co1.ROUTER
    Co2 ->> Co1: Co1.CA|Co2.CB| Property A has value 5.
    Co1 ->> CA: Co1.CA|Co2.CB| Property A has value 5.
:::

Prerequisite of Communication between two Components are:
- Both Components are connected to a Coordinator and {ref}`signed in<sign-in>`.
- Both Components are either connected to the same Coordinator (example one), or their Coordinators are connected to each other (example two).

The following flow chart shows the decision scheme and message modification in a Coordinator.
`Node0`, `NodeR` are placeholders for sender and recipient Node ID.
`Recipient` is a placeholder for the recipient Component ID.
`IA` is the connection identity of `Co1.CA` or of `Node0.COORDINATOR`.
`IB` is the connection identities of `Co1.Recipient`.
Bold arrows indicate message flow, thin lines indicate decision flow.
Thin, dotted lines indicate decision flow in case of errors

:::{mermaid}

> flowchart TB

Reviewer 2: Outstanding graph! I imagine it must not have been easy to produce?
Unfortunately, I can hardly read that anymore in #39. :-(

Author: You can click on that arrow symbol and then use pan and zoom 😁

I started with successful routing of a locally connected Component.
Then I wanted to create an error handling graph (modifying the first one) and noticed, that they should be one and that I have to include a sender from a different Coordinator (sorry for the forgotten inconsistency).

www.mermaid.live helped a lot creating the diagrams.

Reviewer 2: ooh, nice! I'll bookmark that.
Good tip with the arrow - Can't figure out how to zoom without also zooming my browser (wheel or Ctrl-+/-), but I can scroll and get a wide window. If that is not sufficient, we have to find another way because that will also be unreadable on the website.

    C([Node0.CA DEALER]) == "NodeR.Recipient|Node0.CA|Content" ==> R0

>     R0[receive] == "IA|NodeR.Recipient|Node0.CA|Content" ==> CN0{Node0 == Co1}

Reviewer 2: "Node0 == Co1": you mean "Co1 is in Node0", right? took me a bit to parse that.

Reviewer 2: Also, a logic question? How can the answer to that ever be "no"? By definition (elsewhere), Node0.CA's dealer socket may only connect to Node0's Coordinator Co1, so "Node0==Co1" _always has to be true, no?

Author: The scheme started with a locally connected Component.
Then I noticed, that the Router socket might accept a message from another Coordinator and I adjusted everything, except for the inconsistency, that the Dealer socket might belong to Node0's Coordinator, not to CA directly...

> Node0 == Co1": you mean "Co1 is in Node0", right? took me a bit to parse that.

I meant, that the placeholder Node0 (which could be anything) equals the Node ID "Co1". Code example:
~~~python
Node0, ID = sender.split(",")
If Node0 == "Co1":
   ... 
~~~

Author: How can I increase understandibility?

Reviewer 2: you reworked the whole thing, I'll check it out again and give feedback on the updated text.

    CN0-->|no| RemIdent
    CN0-->|yes| Clocal{CA in <br>local address book?}
    Clocal -->|yes| CidKnown{IA is CA's identity<br> in address book?}
    CidKnown -->|yes| RemIdent
    Clocal -.->|no| E1[ERROR: Sender did not sign in] ==>|"IA|Node0.CA|Co1.COORDINATOR|ERROR: Sender dit not sign in"| S
    S[send] ==> WA([Node0.CA DEALER])
    CidKnown -.->|no| E2[ERROR: ID and identity do not match]==>|"IA|Node0.CA|Co1.COORDINATOR|ERROR: ID and identity do not match"| S
    RemIdent[remove sender identity] == "NodeR.Recipient|Node0.CA|Content" ==> CNR
    CNR -- "is None" --> Local

>     CNR{NodeR} -- "== Co1"--> Local

Reviewer 2: Should that rather be "== Node0"?

Author: No: If the recipient Node (NodeR) is the node ID of the Coordinator (Co1), independent of the sending Node ID (Node0), then it is a local message.

Reviewer 2: > the node ID of the Coordinator (Co1)

Yes, but the node ID of the Coordinator would not be `Co1`, but "Node0"/N1 -- that was the point I tried to make, but I think I made a mistake and mixed up Node0 and Node1?
I think you have this fixed already?

Author: Yes, I made an update.

>     Local{Recipient<br>==<br>COORDINATOR} -- "yes" --> Self([Message for Co1<br> itself])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Local{Recipient<br>==<br>COORDINATOR?} -- "yes" --> Self([Message for Co1<br> itself])
```

Author: I added question marks to all decision points.

    Local -- "no" --> Local2a{Recipient in Address book}
    Local2a -->|yes, with Identity IB| Local2
    Local2[add Recipient identity IB] == "IB|NodeR.Recipient|Node0.CA|Content" ==> R1[send]

>     R1 == "NodeR.Recipient|Node0.CA|Content" ==> W1([Wire to Co1.Recipient DEALER])

Reviewer 2: Is there a difference between using "**Co1**.Recipient" here and "**Node0**.CA" in the other path termination? Shouldn't both prefixes be the same? (the Node ID as that makes up the first part of the address?)

Author: There is a difference: Co1.Recipient, is some Component connected to Co1, as the message is delivered correctly.
The other termination returns error messages to the original sender, which is Node0.CA.

Reviewer 2: > Co1.Recipient, is some Component connected to Co1

Yeah, but "some Component connected to Co1" must have the same Node namespace as Co1, and _that_ should be used here. no?

Author: Oh, I think you meant the discrepancy between "NodeR.Recipient" and "Co1.Recipient"?

I talked about the other "Node0.CA", which is different.

Nevertheless, let's use the other comment for discussion regarding clarity.

Reviewer 2: Yes. OK.

>     Local2a -.->|no| E3[ERROR Recipient unknown<br>send Error to original sender] ==>|"Node0.CA|Co1.COORDINATOR|ERROR Co1.Recipient is unknown"|CNR

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Local2a -.->|no| E3[ERROR Recipient unknown<br>send Error to original sender] ==>|"NodeR.CA|Co1.COORDINATOR|ERROR Co1.Recipient is unknown"|CNR
```

Author: Node0 is correct, as the error message has to return to the original Node.

    CNR -- "== connected Coordinator Co2" --> Keep
    Keep[send to Coordinator Co2] == "NodeR.Recipient|Node0.CA|Content" ==> R2[send]
    R2 == "NodeR.Recipient|Node0.CA|Content" ==> W2([Wire to Co2 ROUTER])

>     CNR -- "reachable via Coordinator CoX" --> Augment

Reviewer 2: Should we leave out the advanced routing (more than two Coordinators) for now, and just add it in a remark/todo/issue? It could help keeping focus (and the diagrams smaller :D), and for what we imagine so far I don't think multi-hop is essential?

Author: Ok

    else only Component ID
        CA ->> N1: CB|N1.CA| Give me property A.
    end
    participant N1 as N1.COORDINATOR
    N1 ->> CB: N1.CB|N1.CA| Give me property A.
    Note left of CB: Reads property A
    CB ->> N1: N1.CA|N1.CB| Property A has value 5.
    N1 ->> CA: N1.CA|N1.CB| Property A has value 5.
:::

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    CA ->> N1: N2.CB|N1.CA| Give me property A.
    participant N1 as N1.COORDINATOR
    Note over N1,N2: N1 DEALER socket sends to N2 ROUTER
    participant N2 as N2.COORDINATOR
    N1 ->> N2: N2.CB|N1.CA| Give me property A.
    N2 ->> CB: N2.CB|N1.CA| Give me property A.
    Note left of CB: Reads property A
    CB ->> N2: N1.CA|N2.CB| Property A has value 5.
    Note over N1,N2: N2 DEALER socket sends to N1 ROUTER
    N2 ->> N1: N1.CA|N2.CB| Property A has value 5.
    N1 ->> CA: N1.CA|N2.CB| Property A has value 5.
:::

Prerequisite of Communication between two Components are:
- Both Components are connected to a Coordinator and {ref}`signed in<sign-in>`.
- Both Components are either connected to the same Coordinator (example one), or their Coordinators are connected to each other (example two).

> The following flow chart shows the decision scheme and message modification in a Coordinator `Co1` of Node `N1`.

Reviewer 2: Great idea to add a preamble explanation!

Its full ID is `N1.Coordinator`.

> `n0`, `nR` are placeholders for sender and recipient Node ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`nS`, `nR` are placeholders for sender and recipient Node ID.
```
for clearer symmetry sender/receiver?

Author: I was reluctant to use ns...

`recipient` is a placeholder for the recipient Component ID.

> `IA` is the connection identity of the Component `N1.CA` (if it is directly connected to `Co1`) or of its Coordinator `n0.COORDINATOR`.

Reviewer 2: I think what is confusing me is the mix of generality and specificity. We have a Component `CA` on a Node `N1`, how can the name of its Coordinator be anything but `N1.COORDINATOR`? I think it shows through, as you felt you should clarify in the arrow texts that `|n0.CA|` == in fact `|N1.CA|` (which further clutters up the graph) :-/

Maybe it works better if it's all numbers/letters, or all "S" and "R" designators?

Reviewer 2: Also, I get that `IA` is the connection identity of `N1.CA`, but how can it _alternatively_ be the identity of `N1.CA`'s ("its") Coordinator :interrobang:

Author: I tried to show the path of an arbitrary message through the system, depending on different cases.

It seems, not very successful.

> Also, I get that IA is the connection identity of N1.CA, but how can it alternatively be the identity of N1.CA's ("its") Coordinator ⁉️

Oh  yeah, that should be a variable as well .

Author: > Maybe it works better if it's all numbers/letters, or all "S" and "R" designators?

so, no specifics?

Reviewer 2: I'd say, either all specific (fixed numbers/letters), or all generic (S/R), not a mixture.  :shrug:

Author: Ok. I'll try it.

Reviewer 2: I think there's nothing more to be done here, resolving.

`IB` is the connection identities of `N1.Recipient`.
Bold arrows indicate message flow, thin lines indicate decision flow.
Thin, dotted lines indicate decision flow in case of errors.

> Placeholder values are written in lowercase, while actually known values are begin with an uppercase letter.

Reviewer 2: that helps!

:::{mermaid}
flowchart TB
    C1([N1.CA DEALER]) == "nr.recipient|n0.CA|Content<br>(==nr.recipient|N1.CA|Content)" ==> R0
    C0([n0.COORDINATOR DEALER]) == "nr.recipient|n0.CA|Content" ==> R0

>     R0[receive] == "IA|nr.recipient|n0.CA|Content" ==> Cn0{n0 == N1?}

Reviewer 2: Maybe this can be simplified to "we are receiving a message `nr.recipient|ns.CA|Content`? Ultimately it does not matter if it comes from a Component or a Coordinator, I think. 
Maybe use `Is` as the (generic) sender identity? Does that make sense?

Author: Done

    Cn0-->|no| RemIdent
    Cn0-->|yes| Clocal{CA in <br>local address book?}
    Clocal -->|yes| CidKnown{IA is CA's identity<br> in address book?}
    CidKnown -->|yes| RemIdent

>     Clocal -.->|no| E1[ERROR: Sender did not sign in] ==>|"IA|n0.CA|N1.COORDINATOR|ERROR: Sender dit not sign in<br>(==IA|N1.CA|N1.COORDINATOR|ERROR...)"| S

Reviewer 2: "did not sign in" -> "unknown"?

Author: Yes

    S[send] ==> WA([N1.CA DEALER])
    CidKnown -.->|no| E2[ERROR: ID and identity do not match]==>|"IA|n0.CA|N1.COORDINATOR|ERROR: ID and identity do not match<br>(==IA|N1.CA|N1.COORDINATOR|ERROR...)"| S
    RemIdent[remove sender identity] == "nr.recipient|n0.CA|Content" ==> Cnr
    Cnr -- "is None" --> Local
    Cnr{nr?} -- "== N1"--> Local
    Local{recipient<br>==<br>COORDINATOR?} -- "yes" --> Self[Message for Co1<br> itself]
    Self == "nr.recipient|n0.CA|Content<br>(==N1.COORDINATOR|n0.CA|Content)" ==> SC([Co1 Message handling])

>     Local -- "no" --> Local2a{recipient in Address book?}

Reviewer 2: I think the constellation "nr? is None" should trigger an error, as the namespace is missing -- we should _only_ allow that for the sign-in, and in that case the whole recipient is/could be/should be missing (discussed elsewhere).

Or am I confused about the decision to always use full "addresses"/paths, as all Components know their namespace after signin, anyway?

The {ref]}`message-layer` is the common language to understand commands, thus creating a remote procedure call.

(transport-layer)=
## Transport layer

The transport layer ensures that a message arrives at its destination.

### Protocol basics

#### Socket Configuration

Each {ref}`Coordinator <components.md#coordinator>` shall offer one {ref}`ROUTER<appendix.md#router-sockets>` socket, bound to an address.
The address consists of a host (this can be the host name, an IP address of the device, or "\*" for all IP addresses of the device) and a port number, for example `*:12345` for all IP addresses and the port `12345`.

{ref}`Components <components.md#components>` shall have one DEALER socket connecting to one Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Coordinators shall have one DEALER socket per other Coordinator in the Network.
This DEALER socket shall connect to the other Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

:::{note}
While the number of DEALER sockets thus required scales badly with the number of Connectors in a LECO Network, the scope of the protocol means that at most a few Coordinators will be involved.
:::

> Messages must be sent to a Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Author: That you shall not send any Message to the DEALER socket of a Coordinator.

Is this better?
```suggestion
All messages must be sent to a Coordinator's ROUTER socket, not to one of its DEALER sockets.
```

> Messages must be sent to a Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Author: I tried to improve it, please have a look.

#### Naming scheme

Each Component must have an individual name, given by the user, the _Component name_.
A Component name must be a series of bytes, without the ASCII character "." (byte value 46).
Component names must be unique in a {ref}`Node <network-structure.md#node>`, i.e. among the Components (except other Coordinators) connected to a single Coordinator.
A Coordinator itself must have the Component name `COORDINATOR` (ASCII encoded).

> Similarly, every Node must have a name, the _Namespace_.

Author: Here I define _Namespace_ as the Node's name, therefore a link to the glossary will be a circulary link (as the glossary links here).

> Similarly, every Node must have a name, the _Namespace_.

Reviewer: ok, that makes sense

Every Namespace must be unique in the Network.
As each Component belongs to exactly one Node, it is fully identified by the combination of Namespace and Component name, which is globally unique.
This _Full name_ is the composition of Namespace, ".", and Component name.
For example `N1.CA` is the Full name of the Component `CA` in the Node `N1`.

The receiver of a message may be specified by Component name alone if the receiver belongs to the same Node as the sender.
In all other cases, the receiver of a message must be specified by Full name.

#### Message composition

A message consists of 4 or more frames.
1. The protocol version (abbreviated with "V" in examples).
2. The receiver Full name or Component name, as appropriate.
3. The sender Full name.
4. A content header (abbreviated with "H" in examples).
5. Message content: The optional payload, which can be 0 or more frames.

#### Directory

> Each Coordinator shall have a list of the Components (including other Connectors) connected to it.

Author: We have to talk about that separately.

> Each Coordinator shall have a list of the Components (including other Connectors) connected to it.

Author: see #44

(sign-in)=
##### Initial connection

After connecting to a Coordinator (`Co1`), a Component (`CA`) shall send a SIGNIN message indicating its Component name.
The Coordinator shall indicate success/acceptance with an ACKNOWLEDGE response, giving the Namespace and other relevant information, or reply with an ERROR, e.g. if the Component name is already taken.
In that case, the Coordinator may indicate a suitable still available variation on the indicated Component name.
The Component may retry SIGNIN with a different chosen name.

After a successful handshake, the Coordinator shall store the (zmq) connection identity and corresponding Component name in its {ref}`directory`.
It shall also notify the other Coordinators in the network that this Component signed in, see {ref}`Coordinator coordination<coordinator-coordination>`.
Similarly, the Component shall store the Namespace and use it from this moment to generate its Full name.

If a Component does send a message to someone without having signed in, the Coordinator shall refuse message handling and return an error.

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    Note over CA,N1: Name "CA" is still free
    participant N1 as N1.COORDINATOR

>     CA ->> N1: V|COORDINATOR|CA|H|SIGNIN

Author: It was some idea, yes, but it is not decided.

It does not affect the working of the Transport Layer itself, therefore, I'd leave it as is and (maybe) retouch it, once the Message Layer is defined. (Even the type names are not totally fixed yet)

>     CA ->> N1: V|COORDINATOR|CA|H|SIGNIN

Author: The whole Message layer is still TBD, therefore, I do not see the necessity to add a note here.

>     CA ->> N1: V|COORDINATOR|CA|H|SIGNIN

Reviewer 2: Still, dropping a note makes it easier to not miss to update this later, don't you think?

>     CA ->> N1: V|COORDINATOR|CA|H|SIGNIN

Author: I modified line 76 to express, that we put everything in the Content frame:
~~~
Here the Message content is expressed in plain English and placed in the Content frame, for the exact definition see {ref}`message-layer`.
~~~

Here I also add a note, that we have to determine, how we show encoded content (according to the Message Layer) in these examples.

    Note right of N1: Connection identity "IA"
    Note right of N1: Stores "CA" with identity "IA"
    N1 ->> CA: V|N1.CA|N1.COORDINATOR|H|ACKNOWLEDGE: Namespace is "N1"
    Note left of CA: Stores "N1" as Namespace
    Note over CA,N1: Name "CA" is already used
    CA ->> N1: V|COORDINATOR|CA|H|SIGNIN
    N1 ->> CA: V|CA|N1.COORDINATOR|H|ERROR: Name "CA" is already used.
    Note left of CA: May retry with another Name
    Note over CA,N1: "CA" has not send SIGNIN
    Note left of CA: Wants to send a message to CB
    CA ->> N1: V|N1.CB|CA|H|Content
    Note right of N1: Does not know CA
    N1 ->> CA: V|CA|N1.COORDINATOR|H|ERROR:I do not know you
    Note left of CA: Must send a SIGNIN message before further messaging.
:::

##### Heartbeat

Heartbeats are used to know whether a communication peer is still online.

Every message received counts as a heartbeat.

A Component should and a Coordinator shall send a PING and wait some time before considering a connection dead.
A Coordinator shall follow the {ref}`sign out routine<signing-out>` for a signed in Component considered dead.

:::{note}
TBD: Respond to every non empty message with an empty one?
:::

##### Signing out

> A Component should tell a Coordinator when it stops participating in the network with a SIGNOUT message.

Author: Solved differently.

The Coordinator shall ACKNOWLEDGE the sign-out and remove the Name from its Directory.
It shall also notify the other Coordinators in the network that this Component signed out, see {ref}`Coordinator coordination<coordinator-coordination>`.

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    CA ->> N1: V|COORDINATOR|N1.CA|H|SIGNOUT
    participant N1 as N1.COORDINATOR
    N1 ->> CA: V|N1.CA|N1.COORDINATOR|H|ACKNOWLEDGE
    Note right of N1: Removes "CA" with identity "IA"<br> from Directory
    Note right of N1: Notifies other Coordinators about sign-out of "CA"
    Note left of CA: Shall not send any message anymore except SIGNIN
:::

#### Communication with other Components

The following two examples show how a message is transferred between two components `CA`, `CB` via one or two Coordinators.

> Coordinators shall send messages from their DEALER socket to other Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Author: I added a "Remember:"

> Coordinators shall send messages from their DEALER socket to other Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Author: ```suggestion
Remember: Coordinators shall send messages from their DEALER socket to other Coordinator's ROUTER socket.
```

> Coordinators shall send messages from their DEALER socket to other Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Author: I removed it, as I expanded the connection scheme text.

    Note over r2,d2: N2 Coordinator<br>at address2
    Note over r1,d2: Sign in between two Coordinators
    Note right of r1: shall connect<br>to address2
    activate d1
    Note left of d1: created with<br> name "temp-NS"
    d1-->>r2: connect to address2
    d1->>r2: CO_SIGNIN<br>N1, address1,<br>ref:temp-NS
    par
        d1->>r2: GET Directory
    and
        Note right of r2: stores N1 identity
        activate d2
        Note left of d2: created with<br>name "N1"
        d2-->>r1: connect to address1
        d2->>r1: CO_SIGNIN<br>N2, address2<br>your ref:temp-NS
        Note right of r1: stores N2 identity
        Note left of d1: name changed<br>from "temp-NS"<br>to "N2"
        d2->>r1: GET Directory
    end
    d2->>r1: Here is my<br>Directory
    Note right of r1: Updates<br>Glossary
    d1->>r2: Here is my<br>Directory
    Note right of r2: Updates<br>Glossary
    Note over r1,d2: Sign out between two Coordinators
    Note right of r1: shall sign out from N2
    d1->>r2: CO_SIGNOUT
    Note right of r2: removes N1 identity
    d2->>-r1: CO_SIGNOUT
    Note right of r1: removes N2 identity
    deactivate d1
:::

##### Coordinator updates

> Whenever a Component signs in to or out of its Coordinator, the Coordinator shall send a CO_UPDATE message regarding this event to all the other Coordinators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever a Component signs in to or out from its Coordinator, the Coordinator shall send a CO_UPDATE message regarding this event to all the other Coordinators.
```

The message shall contain the Full name of the Component and the event type (sign in or out)

> The other Coordinators shall update their Glossary according to this message (add or remove an entry).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other Coordinators shall update their global Directory according to this message (add or remove an entry).
```

    Note right of r1: Updates global <br>Directory and signs <br>in to all unknown<br>Coordinators
    Note over r1,d2: Sign out between two Coordinators
    Note right of r1: shall sign out from N2
    d1->>r2: CO_SIGNOUT
    Note right of r2: removes N1 identity
    d2->>-r1: CO_SIGNOUT
    Note right of r1: removes N2 identity
    deactivate d1
:::

:::{note}
The sign-in procedure is symmetric, with exception of not creating a DEALER socket, if it already exists.
:::

These are the decision processes for signing in:
:::{mermaid}
graph TD
    COS([ROUTER receives<br>'CO_SIGNIN N2 address2']) --> Store[Store the identity of 'N2']
    Store --> ACK[Respond 'ACK N1'<br>via ROUTER]
    ACK-->DEAL{DEALER socket<br>with name 'N2'<br>already created?}
    DEAL -->|yes| END([End])
    DEAL -->|no| CREATE[Create DEALER<br>named 'N2']
    CREATE --> CONNECT[Connect to address2]

    CMD([Command to sign in<br>to address2])-->CREATE2[Create DEALER<br>named 'temp-NS']
    CREATE2 --> CONNECT

    CONNECT-->SEND[Send 'CO_SIGNIN N1 address1']
    SEND --> END

    AR(['ACK N2' <br>at DEALER]) --> Known{DEALER name == 'N2'?}
    Known -->|no| Rename[Rename DEALER socket to 'N2'] -->SLD

>     Known -->|yes| SLD([Send my local Directory])

Author: Let us keep it in that plain English, abstract way. Once we have the messages, we can introduce it here.

:::

##### Coordinator updates

Whenever a Component signs in to or out from its Coordinator, the Coordinator shall send a CO_UPDATE message regarding this event to all the other Coordinators.

> The message shall contain the Full name of the Component and the event type (sign in or out)

Author: In a small Network with little sign-ins/sign-outs, it seems fine, to send the whole local Direcetory.

I see, however, no reason to send the global Directory and then to filter according to the sending Namespace.

> The message shall contain the Full name of the Component and the event type (sign in or out)

Reviewer: ok, that is true, so maybe we only send the local Directory, which we will define to also contain all remote Coordinators? Or do you want to have two separate send messages for the local and the global Directory, if one or the other is requested? also refer to my comment in #29

> The message shall contain the Full name of the Component and the event type (sign in or out)

Author: What do you think, @bilderbuchi ?

> The message shall contain the Full name of the Component and the event type (sign in or out)

Reviewer 2: Hm, I don't have strong opinions on this. 
I don't mind more message types. 
I'd have gone with one "update" type, i.e. send names of a local Node's components (i.e. what the sending Coordinator is responsible for) and if they signed in or out. And have one "sending everything", which sends the whole directory (global and local). The latter will typically be used on coordinator sign-in, with the former being efficient delta updates on that. Every some "long" period, we can resync with "everything" updates.

> The message shall contain the Full name of the Component and the event type (sign in or out)

Reviewer 2: I opened #46 on the sign-in info propagation to keep #29 focused.

> The message shall contain the Full name of the Component and the event type (sign in or out)

Reviewer: This is ok for me how it is now, we can merge this and continue the discussion in #29 and #46 separately

The other Coordinators shall update their global Directory according to this message (add or remove an entry).

(message-layer)=
## Message layer

### Messages for Transport Layer

- SIGNIN
- SIGNOUT
- ACKNOWLEDGE
- ERROR
- PING
- CO_SIGNIN
- CO_SIGNOUT
- CO_TELL_ALL
- CO_NEW

> - CO_UPDATE

Author: I already did that (in the meantime) in a local commit.

# Control protocol

The control protocol transmits messages via its {ref}`transport-layer` from one Component to another one.
The {ref]}`message-layer` is the common language to understand commands, thus creating a remote procedure call.

(transport-layer)=
## Transport layer

The transport layer ensures, that a message arrives its destination.

### Sockets and Connections

> We use [zmq](https://zeromq.org/) sockets for our communication. For more details see the [zmq guide](https://zguide.zeromq.org/) or [zmq API](http://api.zeromq.org/)

Author: Ok, I moved it.

#### Definitions

Zmq messages consist in a series of frames, each is a byte sequence.
We indicate the separation between frames with `|`.
An empty frame is indicated with two frame separators `||`, even at the beginning or end of a message.
For example `||Second frame|Third frame||Fifth frame` consists of 5 frames.

> The first and fourth frames are empty frames.

Author: Done manually.

#### Configuration

Each {ref}`Coordinator <components.md#coordinator>` shall offer one ROUTER socket, bound to a host name (or IP address or any address of a computer with "*") and port.

> 

Author: You can bind to a specific IP address of your computer (i.e. you have several network adapters) or you can bind to all IP addresses with "*". For example "tcp://*:12345" binds to all IP addresses at port 12345.

> 

Author: I tried to make it more descriptive.

> 

Reviewer 2: Thanks!

{ref}`Components <components.md#components>` shall have one DEALER socket connecting to one Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Coordinators shall have one DEALER socket per other Coordinator in the Network.
This DEALER socket shall connect to the other Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Messages must be sent to a Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

(router-sockets)=
#### Particularities of ROUTER sockets

> A small introduction to ROUTER sockets, for more details see [zmq guide chapter 3](https://zguide.zeromq.org/docs/chapter3/#Exploring-ROUTER-Sockets).

Author: I made an appendix, where I put the router socket. The general introduction (with the frame separation) is in the network structure.

A router socket assigns a random _identity_ to each connecting peer.
If, for example, two Components `CA`, `CB` connect to the ROUTER sockets, the socket assigns the identities, which we call `IA`, `IB` (they can be any bytes sequence).

Whenever a message is sent to the ROUTER socket from a peer, it reads as a first frame that identity.
For example if `CA` sends the message `Request A`, the ROUTER socket will read `IA|Request A`.
That way, you can return an answer to exactly the original peer and not, for example `CB`.

> If you call the ROUTER's send command with `IA|Reply A`, the socket will send `Reply A` to the peer, whose connection is `IA`, in this case `CA`.

Author: Done manually

The following diagram shows this example communication with two Components:
sequenceDiagram
    participant Code as Message handling
    participant ROUTER as ROUTER socket
    Note over Code, ROUTER: Coordinator
    CA ->> ROUTER: "Request A"
    ROUTER ->> Code: "IA|Request A"
    Code ->> ROUTER: "IA|Reply A"
    ROUTER ->> CA: "Reply A"
    CB ->> ROUTER: "Request B"
    ROUTER ->> Code: "IB|Request B"
    Code ->> ROUTER: "IB|Reply B"
    ROUTER ->> CB: "Reply B"
:::

### Protocol basics

#### Naming scheme

> Each Component has an individual name, given by the user, the _Component Name_.

Author: Maybe Directory and Glossary.

> Each Component has an individual name, given by the user, the _Component Name_.

Author: Done

> A Component Name must be a series of bytes, without the ASCII character "." (byte value 46).

Author: It is easier for the coordinator, if it does not have to decode at all. Therefore the Coordinator splits the byte sequence at a byte with value 46 and uses the first part as namespace and the second part as Component name.

You can use ASCII encoding, but you do not have to.

> Whitespace allowed?

So, yes, whitespaces and values above 127 are allowed.

> Although here we should probably not talk about bytes at all, and just define what the permissible character range is (ASCII or UTF-8, except ".")

So, you're for using some encoding?

> A Component Name must be a series of bytes, without the ASCII character "." (byte value 46).

Reviewer 2: Well, I imagined (for readability/debugging alone) to store the names as strings (`Lab.MyDevice` vs. `4c 61 62 2e 4d 79 44 65 76 69 63 65`), but of course you're right, it will be faster to compare the raw byte values to received frames, and for the computer it doesn't matter. Over the wire and I guess in the zmq frames we'll have bytes only.
However, all user-facing stuff (e.g. logs, printouts, debugging, interfaces) should use strings.

If we stick to printable ASCII as the allowed character set, the en/decoding will be quite simple. UTF-8, less so I imagine.

> So, yes, whitespaces and values above 127 are allowed.

Now I'm confused. What's the character for a code point of 128 (byte 80)? Do you mean UTF-8?
What if we stick to printable ASCII (0x20 to 0x7E)?

> A Component Name must be a series of bytes, without the ASCII character "." (byte value 46).

Author: > Now I'm confused. What's the character for a code point of 128 (byte 80)? Do you mean UTF-8?
What if we stick to the printable ASCII range (0x20 to 0x7E, excluding 0x2E) for the names?

I said any bytes value, therefore also whitespaces. Whether they are useful for a user is another question.

So, let us change it to: 'Names consist of ASCII characters excluding the period (".")'.
If a user want stupid names (including space, new line, carriage return...), its his problem.

> strings

Strings is not that easy. For example a string in C has to be zero terminated. If we stick to "byte sequence representing ASCII characters", everybody knows what to expect and what not.

> A Component Name must be a series of bytes, without the ASCII character "." (byte value 46).

Reviewer 2: > If a user want stupid names (including space, new line, carriage return...), its his problem.

It becomes our problem as soon as someone starts shenanigans with "funny" names.

> A Component name must be a series of ASCII characters, without the character "."

In principle fine, I'd like to restrict this to printable ASCII, but this is an encapsulated/independent change -- I'll open an issue and resolve here.

Component Names must be unique in a {ref}`Node <network-structure.md#node>`, i.e. among the Components connected to a single Coordinator.
The Coordinator itself has the Component Name `COORDINATOR` (ASCII encoded).

> Similarly, every node has a name, the _Namespace_.

Author: Done manually.

Every Namespace has to be unique in the Network.
As each Component belongs to exactly one Node, it is fully identified by the combination of Namespace and Component Name, which is globally unique.
This _full name_ is the composition of Namespace, ".", and Component Name.
For example `N1.CA` is the full name of the Component `CA` in the Node `N1`.

> The receiver of a message may be specified without the Namespace, if the receiver lives in the same Node.

Author: I'm unsure, whether we should add that single exception to the name definition, or only in the section regarding the sign in process.

> The receiver of a message may be specified without the Namespace, if the receiver lives in the same Node.

Author: Done manually. I left it open for the discussion.

> The receiver of a message may be specified without the Namespace, if the receiver lives in the same Node.

Reviewer 2: > I'm unsure, whether we should add that single exception to the name definition, or only in the section regarding the sign in process.

Well, definitely to the name definition here, otherwise the section on sign in might contradict the definition here: _Here we say "must be Full name" - in the sign in section we say "well, except during sign-in"._
We can have it in the sign in section, too, of course.

> The receiver of a message may be specified without the Namespace, if the receiver lives in the same Node.

Author: I added the text, as suggested.

#### Message composition

A message consists in two or more frames.
1. The protocol version (abbreviated with "V" in examples).
2. The receiver full name or Component name, if sender and receiver live in the same Node (Namespace).
3. The sender full name.
4. A content header (abbreviated with "H" in examples).
5. Message content: The optional payload, which can be 0 or more frames.

#### Directory

Each Coordinator shall have a list of the Components connected to it.
This is its _local Directory_.

> The _global Directory_ is the combination of the local directories of all Coordinators in a Network.

Author: Good idea, for easier distinction than "local directory" and "global directory".

> The _global Directory_ is the combination of the local directories of all Coordinators in a Network.

Author: Done

> The _global Directory_ is the combination of the local directories of all Coordinators in a Network.

Reviewer 2: sorry for being not clear enough, I meant "put the term into the glossary?" >.<

### Conversation protocol

In the protocol examples, `CA`, `CB`, etc. indicate Component Names.
`N1`, `N2`, etc. indicate Node Namespaces and `Co1`, `Co2` their corresponding Coordinators.

Here the Message content is expressed in plain English, for the exact definition see {ref}`message-layer`.

> In the exchange of messages, only the messages over the wire are shown, the connection identity of the ROUTER socket is not shown.

Author: It depends on the point of view:
The router socket has a hashtable with these identities, which indicate certain connections to DEALER sockets.
So, the identity lives in the router socket. It describes, however, the connection to the DEALER socket...

> In the exchange of messages, only the messages over the wire are shown, the connection identity of the ROUTER socket is not shown.

Author: I tried to make it more descriptive with "used by the ROUTER".

#### Communication with the Coordinator

(sign-in)=
##### Initial connection

> After connecting to a Coordinator (`Co1`), a Component (`CA`) shall send a SIGNIN message indicating its Component Name.
> The Coordinator shall respond with an ACKNOWLEDGE, giving the Namespace and other relevant information, or with an ERROR, if the Component Name is already taken.
> After that successful handshake, the Coordinator shall store the connection identity and corresponding Component Name in its local {ref}`directory`.
> It shall also publish to the other Coordinators in the network that this Component signed in, see {ref}`Coordinator coordination<coordinator-coordination>`.
> Similarly, the Component shall store the Namespace and use it from this moment to generate its full name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After connecting to a Coordinator (`Co1`), a Component (`CA`) shall send a SIGNIN message indicating its Component Name.
The Coordinator shall indicate success/acceptance with an ACKNOWLEDGE response, giving the Namespace and other relevant information, or reply with an ERROR, e.g. if the Component Name is already taken.
In that case, the Coordinator may indicate a suitable still available variation on the indicated Component Name.
The Component may retry SIGNIN with a different chosen name.

After a successful handshake, the Coordinator shall store the (zmq) connection identity and corresponding Component Name in its local {ref}`directory`.
It shall also notify the other Coordinators in the network that this Component signed in, see {ref}`Coordinator coordination<coordinator-coordination>`.
Similarly, the Component shall store the Namespace and use it from this moment to generate its full name.
```

If a Component does send a message to someone without having signed in, the Coordinator shall refuse message handling and return an error.

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    Note over CA,N1: Name "CA" is still free
    participant N1 as N1.COORDINATOR
    CA ->> N1: V|COORDINATOR|CA|H|SIGNIN
    Note right of N1: Connection identity "IA"
    Note right of N1: Stores "CA" with identity "IA"
    N1 ->> CA: V|N1.CA|N1.COORDINATOR|H|ACKNOWLEDGE: Namespace is "N1"
    Note left of CA: Stores "N1" as Namespace
    Note over CA,N1: Name "CA" is already used
    CA ->> N1: V|COORDINATOR|CA|H|SIGNIN
    N1 ->> CA: V|CA|N1.COORDINATOR|H|ERROR: Name "CA" is already used.
    Note left of CA: May retry with another Name
    Note over CA,N1: "CA" has not send SIGNIN
    Note left of CA: Wants to send a message to CB
    CA ->> N1: V|N1.CB|CA|H|Content
    Note right of N1: Does not know CA
    N1 ->> CA: V|CA|N1.COORDINATOR|H|ERROR:I do not know you

>     Note left of CA: Should send a SIGNIN message

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Note left of CA: Must send a SIGNIN message before further messaging.
```

:::

##### Heartbeat

> We use heartbeat to know, whether a communication partner is still online.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Heartbeats are used to know whether a communication peer is still online.
```

Every message received counts as a heartbeat.

> 
> A Component should and a Coordinator shall send a PING and wait some time before considering a connection dead.
> A Coordinator shall follow the {ref}`sign out routine<signing-out>` for a signed in Component considered dead.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

After not having received a heartbeat from a peer for a chosen _heartbeat interval_, a Component should and a Coordinator shall send a PING and wait for a PONG response for 3 heartbeat intervals before considering a connection dead.
A Coordinator shall follow the {ref}`sign out routine<signing-out>` for a signed-in Component considered dead.
A Component may reduce its heartbeat interval when it receives a PING. 

```
3 heartbeat intervals should (I think) cover the case of a reconnecting Coordinator -- all reconnection activity should start at the latest after 1 interval.

Author: If the Coordinator is restarting, then it does not know the Component, so they have to sign in again.

If a Component reconnects, it has a new Connection identity and has to sign in again.

The only use case for PING is, that a Component did not send any message.
The answer should arrive within one heartbeat interval (at least if it is around 1 s).

> A Component may reduce its heartbeat interval when it receives a PING. 

What is your idea behind this?

Author: > thee component will send a PING, which the Component answers.

That confused me.

Now I got it.

Author: Let us discuss in #40

Author: I marked it as TBD, so it will be handled later with its own issue.

:::{note}
TBD: Respond to every non empty message with an empty one?
:::

##### Signing out

> A Component should tell a Coordinator, when it stops working, with a SIGNOUT message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Component should tell a Coordinator when it stops participating in the network with a SIGNOUT message.
```

> The Coordinator shall ACKNOWLEDGE the sign out and remove the Name from its directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Coordinator shall ACKNOWLEDGE the sign-out and remove the Name from its directory.
```

> It shall also publish to the other Coordinators in the network that this Component signed out, see {ref}`Coordinator coordination<coordinator-coordination>`.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It shall also notify the other Coordinators in the network that this Component signed out, see {ref}`Coordinator coordination<coordinator-coordination>`.

```
"publish to" sounds like zmq PUB, I'm not sure that that is the intention.

Author: It was my intention, when I wrote it, as that was the state of discussion.

Now "notify" is better.

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    CA ->> N1: V|COORDINATOR|N1.CA|H|SIGNOUT
    participant N1 as N1.COORDINATOR
    N1 ->> CA: V|N1.CA|N1.COORDINATOR|H|ACKNOWLEDGE

>     Note right of N1: Removes "CA" with identity "IA"<br> from directory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Note right of N1: Removes "CA" with identity "IA"<br> from directory
    Note right of N1: Notifies other Coordinators about sign-out of "CA"
```

    Note left of CA: Shall not send any message anymore except SIGNIN
:::

#### Communication with other Components

> The following two examples show, how a message is transferred between two components `CA`, `CB` via one or two Coordinators.
> Coordinators shall send messages from their DEALER socket to other Coordinator's ROUTER socket.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following two examples show how a message is transferred between two components `CA`, `CB` via one or two Coordinators.
Coordinators shall send messages from their DEALER socket to other Coordinator's ROUTER socket.
```

> Coordinators shall hand on the message to the corresponding Coordinator or connected Component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Coordinators shall route the message to the corresponding Coordinator or connected Component.
```

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    alt full name
        CA ->> N1: V|N1.CB|N1.CA|H| Give me property A.
    else only Component name
        CA ->> N1: V|CB|N1.CA|H| Give me property A.
    end
    participant N1 as N1.COORDINATOR
    N1 ->> CB: V|N1.CB|N1.CA|H| Give me property A.
    Note left of CB: Reads property A
    CB ->> N1: V|N1.CA|N1.CB|H| Property A has value 5.
    N1 ->> CA: V|N1.CA|N1.CB|H| Property A has value 5.
:::

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    CA ->> N1: V|N2.CB|N1.CA|H| Give me property A.
    participant N1 as N1.COORDINATOR
    Note over N1,N2: N1 DEALER socket sends to N2 ROUTER
    participant N2 as N2.COORDINATOR
    N1 ->> N2: V|N2.CB|N1.CA|H| Give me property A.
    N2 ->> CB: V|N2.CB|N1.CA|H| Give me property A.
    Note left of CB: Reads property A
    CB ->> N2: V|N1.CA|N2.CB|H| Property A has value 5.
    Note over N1,N2: N2 DEALER socket sends to N1 ROUTER
    N2 ->> N1: V|N1.CA|N2.CB|H| Property A has value 5.
    N1 ->> CA: V|N1.CA|N2.CB|H| Property A has value 5.
:::

> Prerequisite of Communication between two Components are:
> - Both Components are connected to a Coordinator and {ref}`signed in<sign-in>`.
> - Both Components are either connected to the same Coordinator (example one), or their Coordinators are connected to each other (example two).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prerequisites of Communication between two Components are:
- Both Components are connected to a Coordinator and {ref}`signed in<sign-in>`.
- Both Components are either connected to the same Coordinator (example one), or their Coordinators are connected to each other (example two).
```

    RemIdent[remove sender identity] == "V|nR.recipient|nS.CA|H|Content" ==> CnR
    CnR -- "is None" --> Local
    CnR{nR?} -- "== N1"--> Local
    Local{recipient<br>==<br>COORDINATOR?} -- "yes" --> Self[Message for Co1<br> itself]
    Self == "V|nR.recipient|nS.CA|H|Content" ==> SC([Co1 Message handling])
    Local -- "no" --> Local2a{recipient in directory?}
    Local2a -->|yes, with Identity iB| Local2
    Local2[add recipient identity iB] == "iB|V|nR.recipient|nS.CA|H|Content" ==> R1[send]
    R1 == "V|nR.recipient|nS.CA|H|Content" ==> W1([Wire to N1.recipient DEALER])
    Local2a -.->|no| E3[ERROR recipient unknown<br>send Error to original sender] ==>|"V|nS.CA|N1.COORDINATOR|H|ERROR N1.recipient is unknown"|CnR
    CnR -- "== N2" --> Keep
    Keep[send to N2.COORDINATOR] == "V|nR.recipient|nS.CA|H|Content" ==> R2[send]
    R2 == "V|nR.recipient|nS.CA|H|Content" ==> W2([Wire to N2.COORDINATOR ROUTER])
    subgraph Co1 ROUTER socket
        R0
    end
    subgraph Co1 ROUTER socket
        R1
        S
    end
    subgraph Co1 DEALER socket <br>to N2.COORDINATOR
        R2
    end
:::

#### Coordinator coordination

> Each Coordinator shall keep an up to date global {ref}`directory` with the names of all Components in the Network.
> For this, Coordinators shall tell each other regarding signing in and signing out Components and Coordinators.
> Coordinators shall send on request the Names of their local directory, or of their global directory, depending on the request type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each Coordinator shall keep an up-to-date global {ref}`directory` with the names of all Components in the Network.
For this, Coordinators shall tell each other about sign-ins and sign-outs of Components and Coordinators.
On request, Coordinators shall send the Names of their local directory, or of their global directory, depending on the request type.
```

For the format of the Messages, see {ref}`message-layer`.

> ##### Coordinator sign in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### Coordinator sign-in
```

A Coordinator `Co1`joining a network follows a few steps:
1. It signs in to one Coordinator `Co2` of the Network.
2. It sends a CO_TELL_ALL message to `Co2`, to tell all other Coordinators about `Co1`s address.
3. `Co2` tells all the Coordinators signed in (`Co3`, `Co4`...) about `Co1` with a CO_NEW message.
4. These other Coordinators (`Co3`, `Co4`...) sign in to `Co1`.
5. All Coordinators are connected to all others.

> Two Coordinators shall follow a more thorough sign in/sign out procedure, than Components (address is for example host an port).
> The sign in might happen because of a CO_NEW message arrived or at startup.
> The sign out might happen because the Coordinator shuts down.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two Coordinators shall follow a more thorough sign-in/sign-out procedure than Components (address is for example host and port).
The sign-in might happen because of a CO_NEW message arrived or at startup.
The sign-out might happen because the Coordinator shuts down.
```

    Note over r1,d2: Sign in between two Coordinators
    Note right of r1: shall connect<br>to address2
    activate d1
    Note left of d1: created with<br> name "temp-NS"
    d1-->>r2: connect to address2
    d1->>r2: CO_SIGNIN<br>N1, address1,<br>ref:temp-NS
    par
        d1->>r2: GET local directory
    and
        Note right of r2: stores N1 identity
        activate d2
        Note left of d2: created with<br>name "N1"
        d2-->>r1: connect to address1
        d2->>r1: CO_SIGNIN<br>N2, address2<br>your ref:temp-NS
        Note right of r1: stores N2 identity
        Note left of d1: name changed<br>from "temp-NS"<br>to "N2"
        d2->>r1: GET local directory
    end
    d2->>r1: Here is my<br>local directory
    Note right of r1: Updates<br>global directory
    d1->>r2: Here is my<br>local directory
    Note right of r2: Updates<br>global directory
    Note over r1,d2: Sign out between two Coordinators
    Note right of r1: shall sign out from N2
    d1->>r2: CO_SIGNOUT
    Note right of r2: removes N1 identity
    d2->>-r1: CO_SIGNOUT
    Note right of r1: removes N2 identity
    deactivate d1
:::

##### Coordinator updates

> Whenever a Component signs in to or out of its Coordinator, the Coordinator shall send a note regarding this event to all the other Coordinators.
> The note shall contain the full name of the Component and the event type (sign in or out)
> The other Coordinators shall update their global directory according to this note (add or remove an entry).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whenever a Component signs in to or out of its Coordinator, the Coordinator shall send a message regarding this event to all the other Coordinators.
The message shall contain the full name of the Component and the event type (sign in or out)
The other Coordinators shall update their global directory according to this message (add or remove an entry).
```
I don't think we need to introduce the term "note" in addition to "message". Might need a specific message type.

#### Directory

Each Coordinator shall have a list of the Components (including other Connectors) connected to it.
This is its _Directory_.

> The _Glossary_ is the combination of the Directories of all Coordinators in a Network.

Reviewer 2: ?? :confused:
Ups, what I meant with my comment is: "should 'global/local directory' get an entry in the glossary?"

Author: @bklebel I misunderstood bilderbuchis comment (in another place), where he wanted me to put these names in the glossary, and changed the name to glossary.

I'm going to revert to local/global directory.

Author: Done

Reviewer 2: Thanks :relieved:

#### Directory

Each Coordinator shall have a list of the Components (including other Coordinators) connected to it.
This is its _local Directory_.

> The _global Directory_ is the combination of the Directories of all Coordinators in a Network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The _global Directory_ is the union of the Directories of all Coordinators in a Network.
```
More precise term here.

Reviewer 2: However, with this definition for the global one, this basically becomes an unknowable quantity, as its "true" content is distributed over the Network, so in principle one single Coordinator could not even send it elsewhere.

Author: ```suggestion
The _global Directory_ is a Coordinator's copy of the union of the local Directories of all Coordinators in a Network.
```

Is this better, as it adds the notion, that it is a local copy, which might not coincide perfectly with the mathematical union (unknowable).

#### Coordinator coordination

> Each Coordinator shall keep an up-to-date {ref}`Glossary<directory>` with the Names of all Components in the Network.

Author: Done

##### Coordinator sign in

> A Coordinator `Co1`joining a network follows a few steps:
> 1. It signs in to one Coordinator `Co2` of the Network.
> 2. It sends a CO_TELL_ALL message to `Co2`, to tell all other Coordinators about `Co1`s address.
> 3. `Co2` tells all the Coordinators signed in (`Co3`, `Co4`...) about `Co1` with a CO_NEW message.
> 4. These other Coordinators (`Co3`, `Co4`...) sign in to `Co1`.
> 5. All Coordinators are connected to all others.

Reviewer 2: Why not
```suggestion
A Coordinator `Co1`joining a network follows a few steps:
1. It signs in to one Coordinator `Co2` of the Network.
2. If successful, `Co2` sends a list of all Coordinators (and their addresses) that it knows
3. `Co1` signs in to all Coordinators on this list that it does not know yet (step 1)
4. All Coordinators are connected to all others.
```
* Same outcome
* The responsibility for connecting remains with the connecting Coordinator
* There is not arbitrary difference between `Co2` and `Co3+` w.r.t. to the connection topology, they all were connected by `Co1`'s actions.

Author: That requires, that every Coordinator stores the addresses of the Coordinators.
In my setup, all Coordinators know their own address and can forget the other addresses after connecting.

> No "tell-all" message type needed. 

Yes, but you need a "give me all Coordinators" message type. 

Oh, or it is part of the local directory...?

Reviewer 2: > That requires, that every Coordinator stores the addresses of the Coordinators.
In my setup, all Coordinators know their own address and can forget the other addresses after connecting.

Indeed... hmmm..

> Yes, but you need a "give me all Coordinators" message type.

No, this is just part of the sign-in flow for a coordinator.

> Oh, or it is part of the local directory...?

We would need a separate mapping from Coordinator full name to Coordinator (router) address.

Reviewer: Here another suggestion

```suggestion
A Coordinator `Co1`joining a network follows a few steps:
1. `Co1` signs in to one Coordinator `Co2` of the Network.
2. After successful a sign in handshake, `Co1` requests a list of all other Coordinators known to `Co2` (`Co3`, `Co4`, ...). 
3. `Co1` signs in to all the Coordinators on the list of `Co2`
4. `Co1` requests the lists of the connected Coordinators from all now connected Coordinators (except from `Co2`, it already has this one)
5. `Co1` compares the lists, and notifies Coordinators which have an incomplete set of the missing Coordinators
6. Coordinators with previously incomplete sets do sign ins to the new Coordinators they have been told about, until all Coordinators are connected to all others
```
In this case, if some Coordinator somehow drops out, those lists come out of sync, at every new sign in of a new Coordinator, the whole system brings itself back into sync. 
The only new message type would be "hey, you are missing a few more connections". 
For clarity, I separated the request for the list of connected Coordinators from the initial `SIGNIN`, although that could be part of the `SIGNIN` flow. 

> We would need a separate mapping from Coordinator full name to Coordinator (router) address.

Remember that we have a separate DEALER for every other Coordinator's connected ROUTER socket, yes, we need (in the implementation) to keep track of which DEALER socket belongs to which remote Coordinator's ROUTER address, but we need to do that anyways.

Author: Let us discuss in #44

Reviewer 2: Sounds good, let us just drop a TODO annotation here and move on, so that we don't delay the PR more.

Two Coordinators shall follow a more thorough sign in/sign out procedure, than Components (address is for example host an port).
The sign in might happen because of a CO_NEW message arrived or at startup.
The sign out might happen because the Coordinator shuts down.

:::{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
    participant r1 as ROUTER
    participant d1 as DEALER
    participant r2 as ROUTER
    participant d2 as DEALER
    Note over r1,d1: N1 Coordinator<br>at address1
    Note over r2,d2: N2 Coordinator<br>at address2
    Note over r1,d2: Sign in between two Coordinators
    Note right of r1: shall connect<br>to address2
    activate d1

>     Note left of d1: created with<br> name "temp-NS"

Reviewer 2: why do we need this "temp-NS" in the first message? 
Why doesn't N2 respond with its name during sign-in, at which point that gets stored?

Author: At that initial moment, N1 does not know the Node name of N2, so you need some temporary name. N1 only knows the address of N2. 

In order to know, which Dealer socket connects to which Coordinator, we need to send some identification via round trip.
Basically we could use the conversation Id, as well, but that is not yet defined.

Author: Another option, which breaks the dealer to router rule:

If a Coordinator N2 receives a Co Sign in message, it responds twice: once from its router to the dealer (reverse direction), such that N1 might identify the dealer socket as connected to N2; and once from its own dealer to the other router, such that N1 can store the connection identity of N2's dealer.

Author: > why do we need this "temp-NS" in the first message?

Maybe that helps: we send via the Dealer and receive via the Router, so in order to know, which Dealer socket connects to wich Coordinator, we have to send some piece of information (for example that temporary dealer name) via the Dealer on a round trip, we can correlate the dealer socket to the responding (received via router) Coordinator.

Author: Let us discuss in #44

    d1-->>r2: connect to address2
    d1->>r2: CO_SIGNIN<br>N1, address1,<br>ref:temp-NS
    par
        d1->>r2: GET local directory
    and
        Note right of r2: stores N1 identity
        activate d2
        Note left of d2: created with<br>name "N1"
        d2-->>r1: connect to address1
        d2->>r1: CO_SIGNIN<br>N2, address2<br>your ref:temp-NS
        Note right of r1: stores N2 identity
        Note left of d1: name changed<br>from "temp-NS"<br>to "N2"
        d2->>r1: GET local directory
    end

>     d2->>r1: Here is my<br>local directory

Reviewer 2: wait, isn't that the reply to the 1st parallel request above? "GET local directory"?

Author: Yes, it is.

Reviewer 2: should that be so removed from it? Or do you want to show the async nature of the communication?

Author: I wanted to show, that the "get local directory" message is not a response to the second sign in message, but follows immediately after the first sign in message.
The handling of the first sign in message (in N2) takes some time, until it responds.

So yes, the asynchronity causes this delay.

Reviewer 2: OK, sounds good I think.
